README.md, before:

# bpfman-catalog

OLM catalog used to release the OpenShift eBPF Manager Operator.

## Overview

This repository builds and publishes OLM catalogs for releasing the OpenShift eBPF Manager Operator. Catalogs are generated from curated templates that define specific operator versions and upgrade paths, then packaged as OCI images for deployment to OpenShift clusters.

The repository also includes a CLI tool (`bpfman-catalog`) for development and testing, enabling rapid iteration when working with individual bundle images.

## Quick Start

### Releases (Primary Use Case)

```bash
# Edit templates/y-stream.yaml or templates/z-stream.yaml to update operator versions
# Then regenerate catalogs
make generate-catalogs

# Commit the updated catalogs
git add auto-generated/catalog/
git commit -m "Update catalog for new release"
```

The generated catalogs are then built and deployed through CI/CD pipelines.

### Development Testing

For local testing and development:

```bash
# Test template changes
make generate-catalogs build-image push-image deploy

# Or use the CLI tool to test individual bundles
make build-cli
./bin/bpfman-catalog prepare-catalog-build-from-bundle \
  quay.io/redhat-user-workloads/ocp-bpfman-tenant/bpfman-operator-bundle-ystream:latest
make -C auto-generated/artefacts all
```

## Directory Structure

- `templates/` - Curated catalog templates for releases
  - `y-stream.yaml` - Y-stream minor version releases
  - `z-stream.yaml` - Z-stream patch releases
- `auto-generated/` - Generated output directories
  - `catalog/` - Catalogs from templates
  - `artefacts/` - CLI-generated build files
  - `manifests/` - CLI-generated Kubernetes manifests
- `cmd/bpfman-catalog/` - CLI tool source code
- `pkg/` - Go packages for catalog operations
- `Dockerfile` - Container definition for building catalog images
- `catalog-source.yaml` - CatalogSource resource template

## Configuration

Environment variables and Make variables:

- `IMAGE` - Target image name (default: `quay.io/$USER/bpfman-operator-catalog:latest`)
- `BUILD_STREAM` - Template to use (default: `y-stream`, options: `y-stream`, `z-stream`)
- `OCI_BIN` - Container runtime (`docker` or `podman`, auto-detected)
- `LOG_LEVEL` - CLI logging level (default: `info`, options: `debug`, `info`, `warn`, `error`)
- `LOG_FORMAT` - CLI log format (default: `text`, options: `text`, `json`)

## Template-Based Release Workflow

For formal releases, use the template-based workflow which builds catalog images from curated templates that define specific operator versions and upgrade paths.

**User Story**: As an OpenShift release engineer, I want to publish a catalog containing specific operator versions with controlled upgrade paths, then make it available in the cluster for users to install via the console.

```bash
# Generate catalogs from templates
make generate-catalogs

# Build catalog image (defaults to y-stream)
make build-image

# Or build z-stream for patch releases
make build-image BUILD_STREAM=z-stream

# Push to registry
make push-image

# Deploy CatalogSource to cluster
make deploy
```

After deployment, the operator becomes available in the OpenShift console under **Operators → OperatorHub** where users can install it through the UI.

This workflow creates only the CatalogSource resource, allowing administrators to control when and how the operator is installed rather than automatically subscribing to it.

## CLI Tool Workflows (Development)

The `bpfman-catalog` CLI tool is provided for development and testing scenarios, streamlining catalog creation from individual bundles. It supports three workflows for different development needs.

### Building the CLI

```bash
make build-cli
```

The tool will be available at `./bin/bpfman-catalog`. Run `./bin/bpfman-catalog --help` for detailed usage information.

### Workflow 1: Testing Development Bundles

**User Story**: As an OpenShift developer, I want to quickly test a newly built operator bundle by deploying it to my cluster without manually creating catalog configurations.

```bash
# Generate complete catalog build artefacts from a bundle image
./bin/bpfman-catalog prepare-catalog-build-from-bundle \
  quay.io/redhat-user-workloads/ocp-bpfman-tenant/bpfman-operator-bundle-ystream:latest

# Build catalog image, push to registry, and deploy to cluster
make -C auto-generated/artefacts all
```

This workflow generates a complete catalog from a single bundle image, including the FBC template, rendered catalog, Dockerfile, and deployment Makefile.

### Workflow 2: Customising Existing Catalogs

**User Story**: As an OpenShift developer, I want to modify an existing catalog configuration and rebuild it for testing changes to channel structure or bundle versions.

```bash
# Edit the catalog YAML to add/remove bundles or modify channels
vim auto-generated/catalog/y-stream.yaml

# Generate build artefacts from the modified catalog
./bin/bpfman-catalog prepare-catalog-build-from-yaml auto-generated/catalog/y-stream.yaml

# Build catalog image, push to registry, and deploy to cluster
make -C auto-generated/artefacts all
```

This workflow wraps an existing or hand-edited catalog.yaml with the necessary build infrastructure.

### Workflow 3: Deploying Pre-built Catalogs

**User Story**: As an OpenShift developer, I want to deploy a catalog image that's already been built and published to a registry without rebuilding it locally.

```bash
# Generate Kubernetes manifests for an existing catalog image
./bin/bpfman-catalog prepare-catalog-deployment-from-image \
  quay.io/redhat-user-workloads/ocp-bpfman-tenant/catalog-ystream:latest

# Deploy the catalog to the cluster
kubectl apply -f auto-generated/manifests/
```

This workflow generates only the deployment manifests (CatalogSource, Namespace, ImageDigestMirrorSet) for a pre-existing catalog image.

Commit message:

Separate the two development testing workflows in quick start
Split the development testing section into two distinct workflows:

1. Testing Template Changes - Simple Makefile workflow that deploys only
   the CatalogSource, requiring manual operator installation via the console.
   Used when testing modifications to template files.

2. Testing Individual Bundles (CLI Tool) - Automated CLI workflow that
   provides complete deployment including namespace creation, IDMS
   configuration, and automatic subscription. Includes undeploy for cleanup.

This clearly differentiates the simpler template-testing approach from the
more automated CLI tool approach that handles the full operator deployment
lifecycle.

README.md, after:

# bpfman-catalog

OLM catalog used to release the OpenShift eBPF Manager Operator.

## Overview

This repository builds and publishes OLM catalogs for releasing the OpenShift eBPF Manager Operator. Catalogs are generated from curated templates that define specific operator versions and upgrade paths, then packaged as OCI images for deployment to OpenShift clusters.

The repository also includes a CLI tool (`bpfman-catalog`) for development and testing, enabling rapid iteration when working with individual bundle images.

## Quick Start

### Releases (Primary Use Case)

```bash
# Edit templates/y-stream.yaml or templates/z-stream.yaml to update operator versions
# Then regenerate catalogs
make generate-catalogs

# Commit the updated catalogs
git add auto-generated/catalog/
git commit -m "Update catalog for new release"
```

The generated catalogs are then built and deployed through CI/CD pipelines.

### Development Testing

#### Testing Template Changes

For testing modifications to template files:

```bash
# Regenerate, build, and deploy catalog
make generate-catalogs build-image push-image deploy

# Install operator via OpenShift console UI
# Navigate to Operators → OperatorHub and install the operator
```

This deploys only the CatalogSource. Operator installation is manual via the console.

#### Testing Individual Bundles (CLI Tool)

For testing individual bundle images with automated deployment:

```bash
# Build the CLI tool
make build-cli

# Generate catalog from bundle with full automation
./bin/bpfman-catalog prepare-catalog-build-from-bundle \
  quay.io/redhat-user-workloads/ocp-bpfman-tenant/bpfman-operator-bundle-ystream:latest

# Build, push, and auto-subscribe to operator
make -C auto-generated/artefacts all

# Clean up when done
make -C auto-generated/artefacts undeploy
```

The CLI tool provides complete automation including namespace creation, IDMS configuration, and automatic subscription to the operator.

## Directory Structure

- `templates/` - Curated catalog templates for releases
  - `y-stream.yaml` - Y-stream minor version releases
  - `z-stream.yaml` - Z-stream patch releases
- `auto-generated/` - Generated output directories
  - `catalog/` - Catalogs from templates
  - `artefacts/` - CLI-generated build files
  - `manifests/` - CLI-generated Kubernetes manifests
- `cmd/bpfman-catalog/` - CLI tool source code
- `pkg/` - Go packages for catalog operations
- `Dockerfile` - Container definition for building catalog images
- `catalog-source.yaml` - CatalogSource resource template

## Configuration

Environment variables and Make variables:

- `IMAGE` - Target image name (default: `quay.io/$USER/bpfman-operator-catalog:latest`)
- `BUILD_STREAM` - Template to use (default: `y-stream`, options: `y-stream`, `z-stream`)
- `OCI_BIN` - Container runtime (`docker` or `podman`, auto-detected)
- `LOG_LEVEL` - CLI logging level (default: `info`, options: `debug`, `info`, `warn`, `error`)
- `LOG_FORMAT` - CLI log format (default: `text`, options: `text`, `json`)

## Template-Based Release Workflow

For formal releases, use the template-based workflow which builds catalog images from curated templates that define specific operator versions and upgrade paths.

**User Story**: As an OpenShift release engineer, I want to publish a catalog containing specific operator versions with controlled upgrade paths, then make it available in the cluster for users to install via the console.

```bash
# Generate catalogs from templates
make generate-catalogs

# Build catalog image (defaults to y-stream)
make build-image

# Or build z-stream for patch releases
make build-image BUILD_STREAM=z-stream

# Push to registry
make push-image

# Deploy CatalogSource to cluster
make deploy
```

After deployment, the operator becomes available in the OpenShift console under **Operators → OperatorHub** where users can install it through the UI.

This workflow creates only the CatalogSource resource, allowing administrators to control when and how the operator is installed rather than automatically subscribing to it.

## CLI Tool Workflows (Development)

The `bpfman-catalog` CLI tool is provided for development and testing scenarios, streamlining catalog creation from individual bundles. It supports three workflows for different development needs.

### Building the CLI

```bash
make build-cli
```

The tool will be available at `./bin/bpfman-catalog`. Run `./bin/bpfman-catalog --help` for detailed usage information.

### Workflow 1: Testing Development Bundles

**User Story**: As an OpenShift developer, I want to quickly test a newly built operator bundle by deploying it to my cluster without manually creating catalog configurations.

```bash
# Generate complete catalog build artefacts from a bundle image
./bin/bpfman-catalog prepare-catalog-build-from-bundle \
  quay.io/redhat-user-workloads/ocp-bpfman-tenant/bpfman-operator-bundle-ystream:latest

# Build catalog image, push to registry, and deploy to cluster
make -C auto-generated/artefacts all
```

This workflow generates a complete catalog from a single bundle image, including the FBC template, rendered catalog, Dockerfile, and deployment Makefile.

### Workflow 2: Customising Existing Catalogs

**User Story**: As an OpenShift developer, I want to modify an existing catalog configuration and rebuild it for testing changes to channel structure or bundle versions.

```bash
# Edit the catalog YAML to add/remove bundles or modify channels
vim auto-generated/catalog/y-stream.yaml

# Generate build artefacts from the modified catalog
./bin/bpfman-catalog prepare-catalog-build-from-yaml auto-generated/catalog/y-stream.yaml

# Build catalog image, push to registry, and deploy to cluster
make -C auto-generated/artefacts all
```

This workflow wraps an existing or hand-edited catalog.yaml with the necessary build infrastructure.

### Workflow 3: Deploying Pre-built Catalogs

**User Story**: As an OpenShift developer, I want to deploy a catalog image that's already been built and published to a registry without rebuilding it locally.

```bash
# Generate Kubernetes manifests for an existing catalog image
./bin/bpfman-catalog prepare-catalog-deployment-from-image \
  quay.io/redhat-user-workloads/ocp-bpfman-tenant/catalog-ystream:latest

# Deploy the catalog to the cluster
kubectl apply -f auto-generated/manifests/
```

This workflow generates only the deployment manifests (CatalogSource, Namespace, ImageDigestMirrorSet) for a pre-existing catalog image.
